README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# xafty

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)
[![License:
MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
<!-- badges: end -->

Turn your R data pipelines into a scalable and collaborative network
graph.

## What It Does

**xafty** turns your data pipeline into a dependency graph instead of a
linear script. Each step becomes a reusable node that declares what it
needs and what it provides. xafty resolves the execution order for you,
enables reuse across projects, and hides complexity behind clean layers
of abstraction.

➜ [Get Started with
xafty](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/articles/xafty.html)

## Key Advantages

- **High flexibility with no overhead:** Since each node is just a
  function from data.frame → data.frame, you don’t have to adopt a new
  data model or rewrite existing logic. Existing code drops directly
  into the network with minimal changes.
- **Reduced cognitive burden:** You don’t need to remember the correct
  sequence of function calls. Colleagues can retrieve the data they need
  without studying the entire pipeline. They simply query the variables,
  and xafty evaluates the required steps.
- **Effortless extensibility:** Adding a new step is as simple as:
  1.  deciding which variables it needs,
  2.  writing a function that takes and returns a data.frame,
  3.  registering it in the network.
- **Effortless collaboration:** Networks invite contribution. Dropping
  in a new node is simple and low-risk, unlike pipelines where every
  change risks breaking the flow.

## Why It Matters

Most data pipelines are built as one-off scripts: hard to reuse, fragile
to change, and difficult for teams to collaborate on. As projects grow,
this leads to duplicated logic, inconsistent results, and a constant
need to rebuild work that already exists.

xafty treats analytics as a distributed knowledge system rather than a
data processing system. It allows organizations to accumulate and
recombine analytical knowledge incrementally, without central
coordination or pipeline redesign.

## Installation

``` r
 pak::pkg_install("davidcrone/xafty")
```

## Basic Concept

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Mental_Model_Pipelines.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating the evolution from a single processing step to a chained and branched network pipeline" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating the evolution from a
single processing step to a chained and branched network
pipeline</figcaption>
</figure>

Let’s understand the idea behind xafty by going step by step from a
simple script to a network pipeline.

- [Step 1: Stateful Pipeline](#step-1-stateful-pipeline)
- [Step 2: Functional Pipeline](#step-2-functional-pipeline)
- [Step 3: Network Pipeline](#step-3-network-pipeline)

### Step 1: Stateful Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Stateful_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a stateful pipeline, as a “single purpose” block" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a stateful pipeline,
as a “single purpose” block</figcaption>
</figure>

Probably everyone starting off with data analytics has written a data
pipeline that looked similar to the following:

``` r
# 1. Load data
data("mtcars")

# 2. Add derived variable
mtcars$power_to_weight <- mtcars$hp / mtcars$wt

# 3. Get engine lookup table
engine <- data.frame(
  type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
  vs = c(1, 0)
)

# 4. Join everything together
mtcars <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)

# 5. Use results
plot(mtcars$type, mtcars$power_to_weight)
```

This is a good start. It gets to the point, fast and comprehensible. But
as your codebase and use-cases grow, several problems emerge:

- **Hard to reuse:** Scripts are linear and stateful. If you or a
  colleague want only part of the logic, you need to copy-paste code and
  manually recreate upstream context. This often breaks because steps
  depend on hidden side effects or object states.
- **Difficult to scale:** As the script grows, earlier steps become
  tightly coupled to later ones. Small changes upstream can
  unintentionally cascade downstream, making the pipeline fragile and
  harder to extend.
- **Locked to one use-case:** A linear script encodes a single way to
  run the pipeline. If you later need different subsets of the data,
  alternative derivations, or multiple outputs, the entire script must
  be restructured or duplicated.

### Step 2: Functional Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Functional_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a functional pipeline as a modularized and linear structure, where each step is cleanly seperated" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a functional
pipeline as a modularized and linear structure, where each step is
cleanly seperated</figcaption>
</figure>

We can address many of the shortcomings of such a stateful script, by
writing everything as a function:

``` r
get_mtcars <- function() {
  data("mtcars", envir = environment())
  mtcars
}

add_power_to_weight <- function(mtcars) {
  mtcars$power_to_weight <- mtcars$hp / mtcars$wt
  mtcars
}

get_engine_details <- function() {
  engine <- data.frame(
    type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
    vs = c(1, 0)
  )
  engine
}

join_engine_details <- function(mtcars, engine) {
  joined <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)
  joined
}

plot_mtcars <- function(mtcars) {
 mtcars_plot <- plot(mtcars$type, mtcars$power_to_weight)
 mtcars_plot
}

# Assemble the pipeline
mtcars_plot <- function() {
 mtcars <- get_mtcars()
 engine <- get_engine_details()
 
 mtcars <- join_engine_details(mtcars = mtcars, engine = engine)
 mtcars <- add_power_to_weight(mtcars = mtcars)
 
 plot_mtcars(mtcars = mtcars)
}
```

``` r
# Run the pipeline
mtcars_plot()
```

This is already a major improvement. The modular structure makes the
pipeline composable, testable, reusable, and much easier to understand.
While this approach modularizes the logic, it still needs to be
assembled manually:

- **Implicit dependency chains:** Each function still relies on being
  called in the correct order. Dependencies remain implicit in the code
  flow, so the pipeline can break if someone rearranges or reuses
  functions without fully understanding upstream assumptions.
- **Limited flexibility for different outputs:** If you need to return a
  slightly different subset of the data, or produce multiple alternative
  outputs, you end up copying, commenting out or branching some of the
  functions. The pipeline becomes a tangle of custom assembly code
  instead of a reusable structure.
- **Difficult to reason about impact:** If a function is modified, there
  is no built-in way to ask: Which parts of the pipeline rely on this?
  What might this change affect? Understanding ripple effects becomes a
  manual and error-prone process.

### Step 3: Network Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Network_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a network pipeline, where each step is a node connected according to its dependencies" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a network pipeline,
where each step is a node connected according to its
dependencies</figcaption>
</figure>

Moving from a functional pipeline to a network pipeline is the final
step in making our code fully declarative, flexible, and scalable.

We **reuse the functions from [step 2](#step-2-functional-pipeline)**
and express them as a xafty network:

``` r
## Preparation: 
# Make sure that the functions from step 2 are loaded into memory.
## /Preparation

library(xafty)

# Initialize the network with the desired structure
xafty_network <- init_network("example_network", projects = c("mtcars", "engine"))

## Register the functions in project "mtcars" ##

# The function `get_mtcars()` is registered as a root node in the project "mtcars".
xafty_network$mtcars$link(get_mtcars())

# Instead of passing data to `add_power_to_weight`, we register a dependency using query()
xafty_network$mtcars$link(add_power_to_weight(mtcars = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))))

## Register the function `get_engine_details()` in project "engine" ##
xafty_network$engine$link(get_engine_details())

# Finally, we register the join between the two projects, 
# by passing two separate queries to the respective parameters
xafty_network$mtcars$link(join_engine_details(mtcars = query(mtcars = "vs"),
                                              engine = query(engine = "vs")))

# Inspect the network
xafty_network
#> ---
#> 📊 example_network 
#> 
#> 🌲 Projects (2):
#>    │
#>    ├─📁 mtcars
#>    |    ├─ 🌱 Root: am, carb, cyl, disp, drat, gear, hp, mpg, qsec, vs, wt 
#>    |    └─ 🛠 Layer 1: power_to_weight
#>    | 
#>    └─📁 engine
#>         └─ 🌱 Root: type, vs 
#>      
#> 🔗 Joins (1):
#>    🔄 engine ↔ mtcars

# Pull data as needed from the network in the desired column order
query(hp, wt, vs, type, power_to_weight) |>  
  nascent(xafty_network) |> 
  head()
#>    hp    wt vs    type power_to_weight
#> 1 110 2.620  0 V-Shape        41.98473
#> 2 110 2.875  0 V-Shape        38.26087
#> 3 245 3.570  0 V-Shape        68.62745
#> 4 180 4.070  0 V-Shape        44.22604
#> 5 175 3.440  0 V-Shape        50.87209
#> 6 180 3.780  0 V-Shape        47.61905
```

In xafty, each function from step 2 becomes a node in the network.
Instead of passing data to each function, we use `xafty::query()` to
declare which input variables are needed.

In order to retrieve data from the network, we simply tell
`xafty::nascent()` which variables we want.

xafty then

1.  walks the graph,
2.  resolves the required nodes in topological order,
3.  and returns a single data.frame containing precisely what you asked
    for.

For example, if we use the above network to query the following
variables:

``` r
query(hp, type) |> nascent(xafty_network)
```

**The resulting pipeline can be represented as follows:**

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Example_Sub_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating the “collapsed” pipeline from a xafty network" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating the “collapsed”
pipeline from a xafty network</figcaption>
</figure>

➜ Pipelines are no longer assembled manually. You simply query the data
you need and let the system do the orchestration.

➜ In network pipelines, intermediate steps are just as accessible as
final data products. This makes it easy to “branch off” from these
intermediate steps and reuse them, rather than starting from a blank
slate, as is common in many data analytics projects.

Finally, to add the original plot to the network, we now use “objects”:

``` r
# The add_object function allows us to register a function with any return value to our network
xafty_network$mtcars$add_object("mtcars_plot", 
                                plot_mtcars(mtcars = query(engine = "type", 
                                                           mtcars = "power_to_weight")))
```

And this is how we retrieve the object again from our network:

``` r
# Write the object's name in squared brackets
query(mtcars = "[mtcars_plot]") |> nascent(xafty_network)
# As of now, only a single object per query might be retrieved from the network
```

This finally allows us to fully represent the functional pipeline from
step 2 as a network pipeline.

## Additional Features

While **xafty is still in active development**, you will find it already
being quite feature rich:

- Programming with `{states}`, passed alongside queries via
  `xafty::with_state()`.
- Context on entry/exit for each project, similar to
  `dplyr::group_by() / ungroup()`, enabling wrapping for lossless
  transformations.
- Wildcard selection with `xafty::query(project = "*")` to request all
  variables from a project.
- Inspection tools, such as `xafty::build_dag()`, to view the internal
  dependency graph.

## Ideas for Future Enhancements

Network-based pipelines open the door to many extensions and
integrations. Below is an overview of both the near-term roadmap and
more ambitious directions.

### Core Features

Version 1.0 aims to make xafty a practical solution for ~95% of everyday
data-pipeline workflows. To reach that milestone, several essential
features still need to be implemented:

- **Added in 0.3.0:** ~~**A flexible filtering mechanism** using a
  `where()` clause, providing SQL-style filtering~~
- **Added in 0.3.2; 0.3.6:** **Developer tooling**, such as
  visualizations and ~~printable summaries~~ of network components and
  ~~writable pipelines~~, to make building and debugging with xafty
  easier
- **Robust testing and bug fixing** to ensure reliability at scale
- **Removed due to change in scope and vision:** ~~**Support for lossy
  transformations** (e.g., `dplyr::group_by() / summarise()`),
  integrated seamlessly into a network structure~~

### Visionary Features

Beyond the core roadmap, xafty can evolve into a powerful component
within existing analytic ecosystems:

- **Integration with {targets}:** A DAG created via xafty::build_dag()
  could be translated directly into a {targets} pipeline, unlocking
  caching, parallel processing, and full reproducibility
- **Interoperability with DuckDB and Arrow:** Allowing nodes backed by
  SQL or Python would enable cross-language collaboration and
  high-performance hybrid networks

## Get Involved

**xafty** is in active development, and your feedback is incredibly
valuable!

If you’re curious, testing it out, have ideas to improve it, or want me
to prioritize a feature [get in touch](mailto:davidjvcrone@gmail.com) or
[open an issue](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/issues). Whether
it’s bugs, feature requests, or just to chat, I’d love to hear from you!
:)

Commit message:

removed objects from xafty due to change in scope and vision

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# xafty

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)
[![License:
MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
<!-- badges: end -->

Turn your R data pipelines into a scalable and collaborative network
graph.

## What It Does

**xafty** turns your data pipeline into a dependency graph instead of a
linear script. Each step becomes a reusable node that declares what it
needs and what it provides. xafty resolves the execution order for you,
enables reuse across projects, and hides complexity behind clean layers
of abstraction.

➜ [Get Started with
xafty](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/articles/xafty.html)

## Key Advantages

- **High flexibility with no overhead:** Since each node is just a
  function from data.frame → data.frame, you don’t have to adopt a new
  data model or rewrite existing logic. Existing code drops directly
  into the network with minimal changes.
- **Reduced cognitive burden:** You don’t need to remember the correct
  sequence of function calls. Colleagues can retrieve the data they need
  without studying the entire pipeline. They simply query the variables,
  and xafty evaluates the required steps.
- **Effortless extensibility:** Adding a new step is as simple as:
  1.  deciding which variables it needs,
  2.  writing a function that takes and returns a data.frame,
  3.  registering it in the network.
- **Effortless collaboration:** Networks invite contribution. Dropping
  in a new node is simple and low-risk, unlike pipelines where every
  change risks breaking the flow.

## Why It Matters

Most data pipelines are built as one-off scripts: hard to reuse, fragile
to change, and difficult for teams to collaborate on. As projects grow,
this leads to duplicated logic, inconsistent results, and a constant
need to rebuild work that already exists.

xafty treats analytics as a distributed knowledge system rather than a
data processing system. It allows organizations to accumulate and
recombine analytical knowledge incrementally, without central
coordination or pipeline redesign.

## Installation

``` r
 pak::pkg_install("davidcrone/xafty")
```

## Basic Concept

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Mental_Model_Pipelines.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating the evolution from a single processing step to a chained and branched network pipeline" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating the evolution from a
single processing step to a chained and branched network
pipeline</figcaption>
</figure>

Let’s understand the idea behind xafty by going step by step from a
simple script to a network pipeline.

- [Step 1: Stateful Pipeline](#step-1-stateful-pipeline)
- [Step 2: Functional Pipeline](#step-2-functional-pipeline)
- [Step 3: Network Pipeline](#step-3-network-pipeline)

### Step 1: Stateful Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Stateful_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a stateful pipeline, as a “single purpose” block" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a stateful pipeline,
as a “single purpose” block</figcaption>
</figure>

Probably everyone starting off with data analytics has written a data
pipeline that looked similar to the following:

``` r
# 1. Load data
data("mtcars")

# 2. Add derived variable
mtcars$power_to_weight <- mtcars$hp / mtcars$wt

# 3. Get engine lookup table
engine <- data.frame(
  type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
  vs = c(1, 0)
)

# 4. Join everything together
mtcars <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)

# 5. Use results
plot(mtcars$type, mtcars$power_to_weight)
```

This is a good start. It gets to the point, fast and comprehensible. But
as your codebase and use-cases grow, several problems emerge:

- **Hard to reuse:** Scripts are linear and stateful. If you or a
  colleague want only part of the logic, you need to copy-paste code and
  manually recreate upstream context. This often breaks because steps
  depend on hidden side effects or object states.
- **Difficult to scale:** As the script grows, earlier steps become
  tightly coupled to later ones. Small changes upstream can
  unintentionally cascade downstream, making the pipeline fragile and
  harder to extend.
- **Locked to one use-case:** A linear script encodes a single way to
  run the pipeline. If you later need different subsets of the data,
  alternative derivations, or multiple outputs, the entire script must
  be restructured or duplicated.

### Step 2: Functional Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Functional_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a functional pipeline as a modularized and linear structure, where each step is cleanly seperated" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a functional
pipeline as a modularized and linear structure, where each step is
cleanly seperated</figcaption>
</figure>

We can address many of the shortcomings of such a stateful script, by
writing everything as a function:

``` r
get_mtcars <- function() {
  data("mtcars", envir = environment())
  mtcars
}

add_power_to_weight <- function(mtcars) {
  mtcars$power_to_weight <- mtcars$hp / mtcars$wt
  mtcars
}

get_engine_details <- function() {
  engine <- data.frame(
    type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
    vs = c(1, 0)
  )
  engine
}

join_engine_details <- function(mtcars, engine) {
  joined <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)
  joined
}

plot_mtcars <- function(mtcars) {
 mtcars_plot <- plot(mtcars$type, mtcars$power_to_weight)
 mtcars_plot
}

# Assemble the pipeline
mtcars_plot <- function() {
 mtcars <- get_mtcars()
 engine <- get_engine_details()
 
 mtcars <- join_engine_details(mtcars = mtcars, engine = engine)
 mtcars <- add_power_to_weight(mtcars = mtcars)
 
 plot_mtcars(mtcars = mtcars)
}
```

``` r
# Run the pipeline
mtcars_plot()
```

This is already a major improvement. The modular structure makes the
pipeline composable, testable, reusable, and much easier to understand.
While this approach modularizes the logic, it still needs to be
assembled manually:

- **Implicit dependency chains:** Each function still relies on being
  called in the correct order. Dependencies remain implicit in the code
  flow, so the pipeline can break if someone rearranges or reuses
  functions without fully understanding upstream assumptions.
- **Limited flexibility for different outputs:** If you need to return a
  slightly different subset of the data, or produce multiple alternative
  outputs, you end up copying, commenting out or branching some of the
  functions. The pipeline becomes a tangle of custom assembly code
  instead of a reusable structure.
- **Difficult to reason about impact:** If a function is modified, there
  is no built-in way to ask: Which parts of the pipeline rely on this?
  What might this change affect? Understanding ripple effects becomes a
  manual and error-prone process.

### Step 3: Network Pipeline

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Network_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating a network pipeline, where each step is a node connected according to its dependencies" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating a network pipeline,
where each step is a node connected according to its
dependencies</figcaption>
</figure>

Moving from a functional pipeline to a network pipeline is the final
step in making our code fully declarative, flexible, and scalable.

We **reuse the functions from [step 2](#step-2-functional-pipeline)**
and express them as a xafty network:

``` r
## Preparation: 
# Make sure that the functions from step 2 are loaded into memory.
## /Preparation

library(xafty)

# Initialize the network with the desired structure
xafty_network <- init_network("example_network", projects = c("mtcars", "engine"))

## Register the functions in project "mtcars" ##

# The function `get_mtcars()` is registered as a root node in the project "mtcars".
xafty_network$mtcars$link(get_mtcars())

# Instead of passing data to `add_power_to_weight`, we register a dependency using query()
xafty_network$mtcars$link(add_power_to_weight(mtcars = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))))

## Register the function `get_engine_details()` in project "engine" ##
xafty_network$engine$link(get_engine_details())

# Finally, we register the join between the two projects, 
# by passing two separate queries to the respective parameters
xafty_network$mtcars$link(join_engine_details(mtcars = query(mtcars = "vs"),
                                              engine = query(engine = "vs")))

# Inspect the network
xafty_network
#> ---
#> 📊 example_network 
#> 
#> 🌲 Projects (2):
#>    │
#>    ├─📁 mtcars
#>    |    ├─ 🌱 Root: am, carb, cyl, disp, drat, gear, hp, mpg, qsec, vs, wt 
#>    |    └─ 🛠 Layer 1: power_to_weight
#>    | 
#>    └─📁 engine
#>         └─ 🌱 Root: type, vs 
#>      
#> 🔗 Joins (1):
#>    🔄 engine ↔ mtcars

# Pull data as needed from the network in the desired column order
query(hp, wt, vs, type, power_to_weight) |>  
  nascent(xafty_network) |> 
  head()
#>    hp    wt vs    type power_to_weight
#> 1 110 2.620  0 V-Shape        41.98473
#> 2 110 2.875  0 V-Shape        38.26087
#> 3 245 3.570  0 V-Shape        68.62745
#> 4 180 4.070  0 V-Shape        44.22604
#> 5 175 3.440  0 V-Shape        50.87209
#> 6 180 3.780  0 V-Shape        47.61905
```

In xafty, each function from step 2 becomes a node in the network.
Instead of passing data to each function, we use `xafty::query()` to
declare which input variables are needed.

In order to retrieve data from the network, we simply tell
`xafty::nascent()` which variables we want.

xafty then

1.  walks the graph,
2.  resolves the required nodes in topological order,
3.  and returns a single data.frame containing precisely what you asked
    for.

For example, if we use the above network to query the following
variables:

``` r
query(hp, type) |> nascent(xafty_network)
```

**The resulting pipeline can be represented as follows:**

<figure>
<img src="man/figures/Example_Sub_Pipeline.png"
alt="Diagram illustrating the “collapsed” pipeline from a xafty network" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Diagram illustrating the “collapsed”
pipeline from a xafty network</figcaption>
</figure>

➜ Pipelines are no longer assembled manually. You simply query the data
you need and let the system do the orchestration.

➜ In network pipelines, intermediate steps are just as accessible as
final data products. This makes it easy to “branch off” from these
intermediate steps and reuse them, rather than starting from a blank
slate, as is common in many data analytics projects.

Finally, create our plot, we simply query the data we need from the
network and run the plot:

``` r
data <- query(type, power_to_weight) |> nascent(xafty_network)
plot_mtcars(mtcars = data)
```

## Additional Features

While **xafty is still in active development**, you will find it already
being quite feature rich:

- Programming with `{states}`, passed alongside queries via
  `xafty::with_state()`.
- Context on entry/exit for each project, similar to
  `dplyr::group_by() / ungroup()`, enabling wrapping for lossless
  transformations
- Project selection with `xafty::query(project_name)` to request all
  variables from a project using the project’s name
- Inspection tools, such as `xafty::build_dag()`, to view the internal
  dependency graph.
- Debugging tools, such as `xafty::to_script`, which allows you to write
  the entire pipeline as a linear script

## Ideas for Future Enhancements

Network-based pipelines open the door to many extensions and
integrations. Below is an overview of both the near-term roadmap and
more ambitious directions.

### Core Features

Version 1.0 aims to make xafty a practical solution for ~95% of everyday
data-pipeline workflows. To reach that milestone, several essential
features still need to be implemented:

- **Added in 0.3.0:** ~~**A flexible filtering mechanism** using a
  `where()` clause, providing SQL-style filtering~~
- **Added in 0.3.2; 0.3.6:** **Developer tooling**, such as
  visualizations and ~~printable summaries~~ of network components and
  ~~writable pipelines~~, to make building and debugging with xafty
  easier
- **Robust testing and bug fixing** to ensure reliability at scale
- **Removed due to change in scope and vision:** ~~**Support for lossy
  transformations** (e.g., `dplyr::group_by() / summarise()`),
  integrated seamlessly into a network structure~~

### Visionary Features

Beyond the core roadmap, xafty can evolve into a powerful component
within existing analytic ecosystems:

- **Integration with {targets}:** A DAG created via xafty::build_dag()
  could be translated directly into a {targets} pipeline, unlocking
  caching, parallel processing, and full reproducibility
- **Interoperability with DuckDB and Arrow:** Allowing nodes backed by
  SQL or Python would enable cross-language collaboration and
  high-performance hybrid networks

## Get Involved

**xafty** is in active development, and your feedback is incredibly
valuable!

If you’re curious, testing it out, have ideas to improve it, or want me
to prioritize a feature [get in touch](mailto:davidjvcrone@gmail.com) or
[open an issue](https://github.com/davidcrone/xafty/issues). Whether
it’s bugs, feature requests, or just to chat, I’d love to hear from you!
:)
