reference/index.md, before:

# Package index

## All functions

- [`add_join_path()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/add_join_path.md)
  : Add a Predefined Join Path to a Query
- [`build_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/build_dag.md)
  : Build an 'Evaluable' Data Pipeline Object
- [`evaluate_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/evaluate_dag.md)
  : Evaluate a Network Pipeline
- [`get_function_package()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/get_function_package.md)
  : Get the Package Name of a Function
- [`init_network()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/init_network.md)
  : Initialize a New xafty Network
- [`merge_networks()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/merge_networks.md)
  : Merge networks into one
- [`nascent()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/nascent.md)
  : Retrieve Data from a xafty network
- [`print(`*`<xafty_network>`*`)`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/print.xafty_network.md)
  : Print a xafty Network
- [`query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md) :
  Build a xafty Query
- [`register()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/register.md)
  : Register a Function in a Network
- [`set_project_print_order()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/set_project_print_order.md)
  : Set or Change the Print Order of Projects
- [`to_script()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/to_script.md)
  : Write a Pipeline to a Script
- [`where()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/where.md) :
  Filter a Network Pipeline
- [`with_state()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/with_state.md)
  : Add a State to a xafty Query

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ davidcrone/xafty@24a13cc425e105178618e18071f20bfb1ff9c06d 🚀

reference/index.md, after:

# Package index

## All functions

- [`add_join_path()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/add_join_path.md)
  : Add a Predefined Join Path to a Query
- [`build_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/build_dag.md)
  : Build an 'Evaluable' Data Pipeline Object
- [`evaluate_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/evaluate_dag.md)
  : Evaluate a Network Pipeline
- [`from()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/from.md) :
  Specify the Main Project for a Query
- [`get_function_package()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/get_function_package.md)
  : Get the Package Name of a Function
- [`init_network()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/init_network.md)
  : Initialize a New xafty Network
- [`merge_networks()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/merge_networks.md)
  : Merge networks into one
- [`nascent()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/nascent.md)
  : Retrieve Data from a xafty network
- [`print(`*`<xafty_network>`*`)`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/print.xafty_network.md)
  : Print a xafty Network
- [`print(`*`<xafty_project>`*`)`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/print.xafty_project.md)
  : Print a xafty Project
- [`query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md) :
  Build a xafty Query
- [`register()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/register.md)
  : Register a Function in a Network
- [`set_project_print_order()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/set_project_print_order.md)
  : Set or Change the Print Order of Projects
- [`to_script()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/to_script.md)
  : Write a Pipeline to a Script
- [`where()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/where.md) :
  Filter a Network Pipeline
- [`with_state()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/with_state.md)
  : Add a State to a xafty Query
