articles/xafty.md, before:

# Introduction to xafty

The goal of xafty is to build R-based pipelines that are reusable,
scalable, and easy to collaborate on. To achieve this end, xafty
represents your pipeline as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where each
step becomes a node in a network.

This changes how you work with pipelines in one significant way: instead
of executing steps in a predetermined sequence, xafty dynamically
constructs the pipeline at run time based on the data you request.

This article gives you an intro to building network-pipelines. If you’ve
already put together pipelines in R using base R or dplyr, you’ve got
everything you need to start building them with xafty.

## Setup

``` r
library(xafty)
```

To create a network object, we call
[`xafty::init_network()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/init_network.md).

``` r
network <- init_network("intro_network")
```

Each network object must have at least one project in order to start
building the network pipeline.

A project can be added as follows:

``` r
network$add_project("mtcars")
```

Projects are multi-purpose structures which are used to hold and
organize your nodes, as well as encapsulate logic and settings how nodes
should be treated within their respective projects.

This is all the setup we need to start building our network. From here,
the process is just like creating any other pipeline: we need data and
the transformation steps that operate on it.

## Building a Network Pipeline

Let’s add the mtcars dataset to our network.

To do that, we write a function that returns the data.frame:

``` r
get_mtcars <- function() {
  data("mtcars", envir = environment())
  mtcars
}

head(get_mtcars())
#>                    mpg cyl disp  hp drat    wt  qsec vs am gear carb
#> Mazda RX4         21.0   6  160 110 3.90 2.620 16.46  0  1    4    4
#> Mazda RX4 Wag     21.0   6  160 110 3.90 2.875 17.02  0  1    4    4
#> Datsun 710        22.8   4  108  93 3.85 2.320 18.61  1  1    4    1
#> Hornet 4 Drive    21.4   6  258 110 3.08 3.215 19.44  1  0    3    1
#> Hornet Sportabout 18.7   8  360 175 3.15 3.440 17.02  0  0    3    2
#> Valiant           18.1   6  225 105 2.76 3.460 20.22  1  0    3    1
```

To start building a network pipeline, we register the function into the
`mtcars` project:

``` r
network$mtcars$get(get_mtcars())
```

Since the function `get_mtcars` has no dependencies, it is automatically
set as the root node of the project. **Note:** currently, xafty expects
a project to have only one or no root node.

We can inspect the project by printing it to the console and query the
network for our desired variables:

``` r
# Inspecting the network
network
#> Number of projects in network 'intro_network': 1
#> 
#> Project: mtcars
#> Variables: drat, vs, hp, am, disp, cyl, carb, mpg, qsec, wt, gear

# Wildcard selection returns all variables of a project
mtcars <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = "*"))

# Querying variables by name will only return the desired variables
data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = c("carb", "gear")))
head(data)
#>                   carb gear
#> Mazda RX4            4    4
#> Mazda RX4 Wag        4    4
#> Datsun 710           1    4
#> Hornet 4 Drive       1    3
#> Hornet Sportabout    2    3
#> Valiant              1    3
```

### Adding a Node

To let our network grow, we simply query the data we need from the
network, write a step as a function that transforms the data, and
register the function again into the network:

``` r

# 1. retrieve data from the network
data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt")))

# 2. write the transformation step
add_power_to_weight <- function(data) {
  data$power_to_weight <- data$hp / data$wt
  data
}

# 3. register the step to the network
network$mtcars$add(add_power_to_weight(data = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))))
```

When registering a transformation step in the network, we do not pass
data directly to the function. Instead, we declare the required inputs
using
[`xafty::query`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md).
Internally, this query is resolved by
[`xafty::nascent()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/nascent.md)
to obtain the actual data and evaluate the function’s return value, so
the network can determine which variables it contributes.

To avoid recalculating the entire data pipeline, you can register the
function by explicitly stating which variables it adds to the network
using the parameter `vars`:

``` r
network$mtcars$add(fun = add_power_to_weight(data = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))), 
                   vars = "power_to_weight", update = TRUE)
# Note: Setting update = TRUE prevents the network from asking
# whether an already registered function should be updated.
```

Each transformation step (e.g. the function `add_power_to_weight`) in a
xafty network is written as a **“pass-through”** function. Such a
function must satisfy the following requirements:

- It must refer to variables by name, as column positions cannot be
  guaranteed. (If your function depends on a specific data structure
  rather than just variable names, you should use `objects` instead.)
- It must leave the input `data.frame` unchanged and return the entire
  `data.frame` with the added transformation (as embodied by
  [`dplyr::mutate`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/mutate.html)).

These are necessary conditions that make network pipelines possible and
connect to a larger vision:

In a network pipeline, each node represents a self-contained
transformation that encapsulates knowledge about how to derive specific
outputs from given inputs. Rather than being a temporary, task-specific
function, a node defines a reusable mapping between data states, forming
a building block in the network’s directed acyclic graph. As new
patterns in the data emerge and domain knowledge continues to grow,
nodes will be refined and updated. I envision network pipelines as a
continuously evolving data structures that captures and preserves all
the domain knowledge a data analyst can express in code.

### Adding a Join

To join two data sources, we first need to create a second project with
another root node:

``` r
network$add_project("engine")

get_engine_details <- function() {
  engine <- data.frame(
    type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
    vs = c(1, 0)
  )
  engine
}

network$engine$get(get_engine_details())
```

The join is then added to the network as another transformation step. We
tell the network that we wish to register a join by passing two separate
query-calls to the function:

``` r
join_engine_details <- function(mtcars, engine) {
  joined <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)
  joined
}

network$engine$join(join_engine_details(mtcars = query(mtcars = "vs"),
                                        engine = query(engine = "vs")))
```

At the moment, joins are treated as symmetrical operations. As a result,
the network supports only one join definition for each pair of projects.
Moreover, the network assumes that the join is performed between the
projects that appear first in the corresponding
[`xafty::query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md)
call.

To declare that a function depends on a join, register it using a single
[`xafty::query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md)
call that includes at least two different projects with root nodes:

``` r
add_combined_label <- function(data) {
  data$combined_label <- paste(
     data$type, 
     ifelse(data$am == 0, "Auto", "Manual"),
      sep = "_"
  )
  data
}

network$mtcars$add(add_combined_label(data = query(mtcars = "am", engine = "type")))
```

### Grouped Operations

In many workflows, we temporarily group data so that downstream
transformations can operate with group-level context. In a typical dplyr
pipeline, this is as simple as calling group_by(), performing the
transformation, and then calling ungroup().

In a xafty network pipeline, however, grouping must be attached as
contexts to a project. Because nodes are independent and assembled
dynamically, grouping cannot be embedded inline within each function.
Instead, xafty lets you define grouped execution contexts at the project
level using **entry** and **exit** hooks.

A project can automatically group data when a node is entered and
ungroup it when the node finishes, allowing transformation functions to
assume grouped input without containing grouping logic themselves.

We start by defining three pass-through functions:

``` r
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)

group_by_gear <- function(data) {
  group_by(data, gear)
}

ungroup_data <- function(data) {
  ungroup(data)
}

add_mean_hp_per_gear <- function(data) {
  mutate(data, mean_hp_per_gear = mean(hp))
}
```

Next, we create a new project that we will use to attach the context to:

``` r
network$add_project("per_gear")
```

We tell the project to apply grouping whenever data enters a node:

``` r
network$per_gear$on_entry(group_by_gear(data = query(mtcars = "gear")))
```

And to remove grouping once a node completes its computation:

``` r
network$per_gear$on_exit(ungroup_data(data = "{.data}"))
```

Setting the parameter to `{.data}`, will pass the entire data.frame to
the parameter. Currently, this works only with entry and exit nodes.

Now, all nodes registered in `per_gear` will inherit this grouping
behavior when they run.

``` r
network$per_gear$add(add_mean_hp_per_gear(data = query(mtcars = "hp")))

data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = "gear", per_gear = "mean_hp_per_gear"))

head(data)
#> # A tibble: 6 × 2
#>    gear mean_hp_per_gear
#>   <dbl>            <dbl>
#> 1     4             89.5
#> 2     4             89.5
#> 3     4             89.5
#> 4     3            176. 
#> 5     3            176. 
#> 6     3            176.
```

A project may have multiple `on_entry()` or `on_exit()` functions. All
entry and exit hooks are applied in the order they were registered. This
allows us to layer context-setting operations, such as grouping,
arranging, or reshaping, without embedding them directly into individual
transformation functions.

### Inspecting Pipelines

As your network grows, it becomes increasingly important to understand
how xafty assembles and executes your pipeline. Since nodes are combined
dynamically based on the variables you request, xafty provides tools to
inspect the resulting execution plan before running it.

The function
[`build_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/build_dag.md)
constructs the directed acyclic graph for a given query and returns a
list-object that describes the full pipeline:

``` r
  dag <- build_dag(query(mtcars = c("gear"), per_gear = "mean_hp_per_gear", engine = "type"), 
                   network = network)
```

For example, the element `dag$execution_order` shows the exact order of
the assembled pipeline.

``` r
  dag$execution_order
#> [1] "mtcars.get_mtcars"             "engine.get_engine_details"    
#> [3] "engine.join_engine_details"    "per_gear.group_by_gear"       
#> [5] "per_gear.add_mean_hp_per_gear" "per_gear.ungroup_data"
```

## Objects

Objects represent the final consumers of data in a xafty network. Rather
than producing new variables, an object returns an arbitrary R value,
such as a plot, a model, or a summary table, that is intended to be used
directly in a data product.

To add an object to the network, we register it within a project using
`add_object()`. Unlike transformation nodes, objects are identified by a
name rather than by the variables they produce.

Below, we add a boxplot as an object to our network:

``` r
  library(ggplot2)

  network$add_project("objects")

  plot_mtcars <- function(data) {
    ggplot(data, aes(x = type, y = power_to_weight)) + geom_boxplot()
  }
  
  network$objects$add_object(name = "plot_mtcars", 
                             plot_mtcars(data = query(engine = "type", 
                                                      mtcars = "power_to_weight")))
```

When registering an object, we explicitly assign it a name
(“plot_mtcars” in this case). This name is used to reference the object
in subsequent queries, instead of referring to variable names.

To retrieve an object from the network, we query its name using square
brackets:

``` r
nascent(network, query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]"))
```

While objects are typically thought of as the final step in a pipeline,
they can also serve as dependencies for later steps. This allows us to
build more complex outputs by composing simpler ones.

For example, we can define a second object that adds a reference line to
the existing plot:

``` r

add_abline <- function(data, plot, colour = "red") {
  plot + geom_hline(yintercept =  mean(data$power_to_weight), colour = colour)
}

network$objects$add_object("plot_line", add_abline(data = query(mtcars = "power_to_weight"), 
                                                   plot = query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]")))
```

The underlying idea is that data analysts act as “network owners”,
defining and composing objects that encapsulate reusable logic and
results. These objects can then be reused by other analysts as root
nodes in their own networks, allowing them to build increasingly complex
structures without having to manage dependencies explicitly.

## States

States provide a mechanism for parameterizing network execution at query
time. They allow you to expose configurable values, such as styling
options, thresholds, or model parameters, without hard-coding them into
transformation functions or objects.

States are defined on the network using `add_state()` and may optionally
specify a default value (If no default value is set, the network will
use `NULL` as a default):

``` r
network$add_state("line_colour", default = "red")
```

Once defined, a state can be referenced inside a function by using its
name wrapped in curly braces:

``` r

network$objects$add_object("plot_line", add_abline(data = query(mtcars = "power_to_weight"), 
                                                   plot = query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]"), 
                                                   colour = "{line_colour}"), update = TRUE)
```

To assign a concrete value to a state for a specific execution, use
[`xafty::with_state()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/with_state.md)
when constructing the query:

``` r

query_plot <- query(objects = "[plot_line]") |> 
              with_state(line_colour = "blue")

blue_line_plot <- nascent(network, query_plot)
```

States turn an otherwise rigid network into a flexible execution
framework. They enable the same network structure to produce different
outputs without modification, providing a high-level and controlled way
to adapt results to a specific use case.

### Defining a Join Path

xafty constructs join paths using a greedy best-first-search algorithm.
This approach works well as long as the join relationships in the
network are unambiguous. As a network grows and additional projects and
joins are added, however, the automatically selected join path may no
longer match the intended data flow.

To explicitly control how joins are resolved, you can attach a
predefined join path to a query using
[`xafty::add_join_path()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/add_join_path.md):

``` r

query_join <- query(mtcars = "power_to_weight", engine = "type") |> 
              add_join_path(path = c("mtcars", "engine"))

head(nascent(network, query_join))
#>   power_to_weight    type
#> 1        41.98473 V-Shape
#> 2        38.26087 V-Shape
#> 3        68.62745 V-Shape
#> 4        44.22604 V-Shape
#> 5        50.87209 V-Shape
#> 6        47.61905 V-Shape
```

More formally, multiple join paths can be defined for a single query:

``` r

qry <- query(projectA = "col1", projectB = "col2", projectC = "col3")
query_join <- add_join_path(qry, path1 = c("projectA", "projectB"), path2 = c("projectA", "projectC"))
```

This configuration results in two joins being applied: `projectA` is
joined with `projectB`, and `projectA` is joined with `projectC`.
Explicit join paths provide a reliable way to control join behavior in
complex networks and help prevent unintended join resolutions as the
network evolves.

## Wrap-Up

This article introduced the core ideas behind xafty and showed how data
pipelines can be modeled as explicit, inspectable networks of
transformations. By separating data dependencies, execution logic, and
query intent, xafty makes pipelines easier to extend, reason about, and
reuse as they grow.

xafty is still in its experimental form, and feedback from you use is
essential. If you have ideas, questions, or suggestions, or if you are
experimenting with xafty in your own projects, [I would love to hear
from you](mailto:davidjvcrone@gmail.com). Your input will help shape the
next steps of the framework.

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ davidcrone/xafty@42052ce9095773f155333f7c12d431c8968bfa35 🚀

articles/xafty.md, after:

# Introduction to xafty

The goal of xafty is to build R-based pipelines that are reusable,
scalable, and easy to collaborate on. To achieve this end, xafty
represents your pipeline as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where each
step becomes a node in a network.

This changes how you work with pipelines in one significant way: instead
of executing steps in a predetermined sequence, xafty dynamically
constructs the pipeline at run time based on the data you request.

This article gives you an intro to building network-pipelines. If you’ve
already put together pipelines in R using base R or dplyr, you’ve got
everything you need to start building them with xafty.

## Setup

``` r
library(xafty)
```

To create a network object, we call
[`xafty::init_network()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/init_network.md).

``` r
network <- init_network("intro_network")
```

Each network object must have at least one project in order to start
building the network pipeline.

A project can be added as follows:

``` r
network$add_project("mtcars")
```

Projects are multi-purpose structures which are used to hold and
organize your nodes, as well as encapsulate logic and settings how nodes
should be treated within their respective projects.

This is all the setup we need to start building our network. From here,
the process is just like creating any other pipeline: we need data and
the transformation steps that operate on it.

## Building a Network Pipeline

Let’s add the mtcars dataset to our network.

To do that, we write a function that returns the data.frame:

``` r
get_mtcars <- function() {
  data("mtcars", envir = environment())
  mtcars
}

head(get_mtcars())
#>                    mpg cyl disp  hp drat    wt  qsec vs am gear carb
#> Mazda RX4         21.0   6  160 110 3.90 2.620 16.46  0  1    4    4
#> Mazda RX4 Wag     21.0   6  160 110 3.90 2.875 17.02  0  1    4    4
#> Datsun 710        22.8   4  108  93 3.85 2.320 18.61  1  1    4    1
#> Hornet 4 Drive    21.4   6  258 110 3.08 3.215 19.44  1  0    3    1
#> Hornet Sportabout 18.7   8  360 175 3.15 3.440 17.02  0  0    3    2
#> Valiant           18.1   6  225 105 2.76 3.460 20.22  1  0    3    1
```

To start building a network pipeline, we register the function into the
`mtcars` project:

``` r
network$mtcars$get(get_mtcars())
```

Since the function `get_mtcars` has no dependencies, it is automatically
set as the root node of the project. **Note:** currently, xafty expects
a project to have only one or no root node.

We can inspect the project by printing it to the console and query the
network for our desired variables:

``` r
# Inspecting the network
network
#> Number of projects in network 'intro_network': 1
#> 
#> Project: mtcars
#> Variables: drat, vs, hp, am, disp, cyl, carb, mpg, qsec, wt, gear

# Querying a project by its name, will return all variables from that project
mtcars <- nascent(network, query("mtcars"))

# Querying variables will only return the declared variables
data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = c("carb", "gear")))

# Querying can also be done via unquoted symbols
data <- nascent(network, carb, gear)

head(data)
#>                   carb gear
#> Mazda RX4            4    4
#> Mazda RX4 Wag        4    4
#> Datsun 710           1    4
#> Hornet 4 Drive       1    3
#> Hornet Sportabout    2    3
#> Valiant              1    3
```

### Adding a Node

To let our network grow, we simply query the data we need from the
network, write a step as a function that transforms the data, and
register the function again into the network:

``` r

# 1. retrieve data from the network
data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt")))

# 2. write the transformation step
add_power_to_weight <- function(data) {
  data$power_to_weight <- data$hp / data$wt
  data
}

# 3. register the step to the network
network$mtcars$add(add_power_to_weight(data = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))))
```

When registering a transformation step in the network, we do not pass
data directly to the function. Instead, we declare the required inputs
using
[`xafty::query`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md).
Internally, this query is resolved by
[`xafty::nascent()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/nascent.md)
to obtain the actual data and evaluate the function’s return value, so
the network can determine which variables it contributes.

To avoid recalculating the entire data pipeline, you can register the
function by explicitly stating which variables it adds to the network
using the parameter `vars`:

``` r
network$mtcars$add(fun = add_power_to_weight(data = query(mtcars = c("hp", "wt"))), 
                   vars = "power_to_weight", update = TRUE)
# Note: Setting update = TRUE prevents the network from asking
# whether an already registered function should be updated.
```

Each transformation step (e.g. the function `add_power_to_weight`) in a
xafty network is written as a **“pass-through”** function. Such a
function must satisfy the following requirements:

- It must refer to variables by name, as column positions cannot be
  guaranteed. (If your function depends on a specific data structure
  rather than just variable names, you should use `objects` instead.)
- It must leave the input `data.frame` unchanged and return the entire
  `data.frame` with the added transformation (as embodied by
  [`dplyr::mutate`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/mutate.html)).

These are necessary conditions that make network pipelines possible and
connect to a larger vision:

In a network pipeline, each node represents a self-contained
transformation that encapsulates knowledge about how to derive specific
outputs from given inputs. Rather than being a temporary, task-specific
function, a node defines a reusable mapping between data states, forming
a building block in the network’s directed acyclic graph. As new
patterns in the data emerge and domain knowledge continues to grow,
nodes will be refined and updated. I envision network pipelines as a
continuously evolving data structures that captures and preserves all
the domain knowledge a data analyst can express in code.

### Adding a Join

To join two data sources, we first need to create a second project with
another root node:

``` r
network$add_project("engine")

get_engine_details <- function() {
  engine <- data.frame(
    type = as.factor(c("Straight", "V-Shape")),
    vs = c(1, 0)
  )
  engine
}

network$engine$get(get_engine_details())
```

The join is then added to the network as another transformation step. We
tell the network that we wish to register a join by passing two separate
query-calls to the function:

``` r
join_engine_details <- function(mtcars, engine) {
  joined <- merge(mtcars, engine, by = "vs", all.x = TRUE, sort = FALSE)
  joined
}

network$engine$join(join_engine_details(mtcars = query(mtcars = "vs"),
                                        engine = query(engine = "vs")))
```

At the moment, joins are treated as symmetrical operations. As a result,
the network supports only one join definition for each pair of projects.
Moreover, the network assumes that the join is performed between the
projects that appear first in the corresponding
[`xafty::query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md)
call.

To declare that a function depends on a join, register it using a single
[`xafty::query()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/query.md)
call that includes at least two different projects with root nodes:

``` r
add_combined_label <- function(data) {
  data$combined_label <- paste(
     data$type, 
     ifelse(data$am == 0, "Auto", "Manual"),
      sep = "_"
  )
  data
}

network$mtcars$add(add_combined_label(data = query(mtcars = "am", engine = "type")))
```

### Grouped Operations

In many workflows, we temporarily group data so that downstream
transformations can operate with group-level context. In a typical dplyr
pipeline, this is as simple as calling group_by(), performing the
transformation, and then calling ungroup().

In a xafty network pipeline, however, grouping must be attached as
contexts to a project. Because nodes are independent and assembled
dynamically, grouping cannot be embedded inline within each function.
Instead, xafty lets you define grouped execution contexts at the project
level using **entry** and **exit** hooks.

A project can automatically group data when a node is entered and
ungroup it when the node finishes, allowing transformation functions to
assume grouped input without containing grouping logic themselves.

We start by defining three pass-through functions:

``` r
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)

group_by_gear <- function(data) {
  group_by(data, gear)
}

ungroup_data <- function(data) {
  ungroup(data)
}

add_mean_hp_per_gear <- function(data) {
  mutate(data, mean_hp_per_gear = mean(hp))
}
```

Next, we create a new project that we will use to attach the context to:

``` r
network$add_project("per_gear")
```

We tell the project to apply grouping whenever data enters a node:

``` r
network$per_gear$on_entry(group_by_gear(data = query(mtcars = "gear")))
```

And to remove grouping once a node completes its computation:

``` r
network$per_gear$on_exit(ungroup_data(data = "{.data}"))
```

Setting the parameter to `{.data}`, will pass the entire data.frame to
the parameter. Currently, this works only with entry and exit nodes.

Now, all nodes registered in `per_gear` will inherit this grouping
behavior when they run.

``` r
network$per_gear$add(add_mean_hp_per_gear(data = query(mtcars = "hp")))

data <- nascent(network, query(mtcars = "gear", per_gear = "mean_hp_per_gear"))

head(data)
#> # A tibble: 6 × 2
#>    gear mean_hp_per_gear
#>   <dbl>            <dbl>
#> 1     4             89.5
#> 2     4             89.5
#> 3     4             89.5
#> 4     3            176. 
#> 5     3            176. 
#> 6     3            176.
```

A project may have multiple `on_entry()` or `on_exit()` functions. All
entry and exit hooks are applied in the order they were registered. This
allows us to layer context-setting operations, such as grouping,
arranging, or reshaping, without embedding them directly into individual
transformation functions.

### Inspecting Pipelines

As your network grows, it becomes increasingly important to understand
how xafty assembles and executes your pipeline. Since nodes are combined
dynamically based on the variables you request, xafty provides tools to
inspect the resulting execution plan before running it.

The function
[`build_dag()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/build_dag.md)
constructs the directed acyclic graph for a given query and returns a
list-object that describes the full pipeline:

``` r
  dag <- build_dag(query(mtcars = c("gear"), per_gear = "mean_hp_per_gear", engine = "type"), 
                   network = network)
```

For example, the element `dag$execution_order` shows the exact order of
the assembled pipeline.

``` r
  dag$execution_order
#> [1] "mtcars.get_mtcars"             "engine.get_engine_details"    
#> [3] "engine.join_engine_details"    "per_gear.group_by_gear"       
#> [5] "per_gear.add_mean_hp_per_gear" "per_gear.ungroup_data"
```

## Objects

Objects represent the final consumers of data in a xafty network. Rather
than producing new variables, an object returns an arbitrary R value,
such as a plot, a model, or a summary table, that is intended to be used
directly in a data product.

To add an object to the network, we register it within a project using
`add_object()`. Unlike transformation nodes, objects are identified by a
name rather than by the variables they produce.

Below, we add a boxplot as an object to our network:

``` r
  library(ggplot2)

  network$add_project("objects")

  plot_mtcars <- function(data) {
    ggplot(data, aes(x = type, y = power_to_weight)) + geom_boxplot()
  }
  
  network$objects$add_object(name = "plot_mtcars", 
                             plot_mtcars(data = query(engine = "type", 
                                                      mtcars = "power_to_weight")))
```

When registering an object, we explicitly assign it a name
(“plot_mtcars” in this case). This name is used to reference the object
in subsequent queries, instead of referring to variable names.

To retrieve an object from the network, we query its name using square
brackets:

``` r
nascent(network, query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]"))
```

While objects are typically thought of as the final step in a pipeline,
they can also serve as dependencies for later steps. This allows us to
build more complex outputs by composing simpler ones.

For example, we can define a second object that adds a reference line to
the existing plot:

``` r

add_abline <- function(data, plot, colour = "red") {
  plot + geom_hline(yintercept =  mean(data$power_to_weight), colour = colour)
}

network$objects$add_object("plot_line", add_abline(data = query(mtcars = "power_to_weight"), 
                                                   plot = query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]")))
```

The underlying idea is that data analysts act as “network owners”,
defining and composing objects that encapsulate reusable logic and
results. These objects can then be reused by other analysts as root
nodes in their own networks, allowing them to build increasingly complex
structures without having to manage dependencies explicitly.

## States

States provide a mechanism for parameterizing network execution at query
time. They allow you to expose configurable values, such as styling
options, thresholds, or model parameters, without hard-coding them into
transformation functions or objects.

States are defined on the network using `add_state()` and may optionally
specify a default value (If no default value is set, the network will
use `NULL` as a default):

``` r
network$add_state("line_colour", default = "red")
```

Once defined, a state can be referenced inside a function by using its
name wrapped in curly braces:

``` r

network$objects$add_object("plot_line", add_abline(data = query(mtcars = "power_to_weight"), 
                                                   plot = query(objects = "[plot_mtcars]"), 
                                                   colour = "{line_colour}"), update = TRUE)
```

To assign a concrete value to a state for a specific execution, use
[`xafty::with_state()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/with_state.md)
when constructing the query:

``` r

query_plot <- query(objects = "[plot_line]") |> 
              with_state(line_colour = "blue")

blue_line_plot <- nascent(network, query_plot)
```

States turn an otherwise rigid network into a flexible execution
framework. They enable the same network structure to produce different
outputs without modification, providing a high-level and controlled way
to adapt results to a specific use case.

### Defining a Join Path

xafty constructs join paths using a greedy best-first-search algorithm.
This approach works well as long as the join relationships in the
network are unambiguous. As a network grows and additional projects and
joins are added, however, the automatically selected join path may no
longer match the intended data flow.

To explicitly control how joins are resolved, you can attach a
predefined join path to a query using
[`xafty::add_join_path()`](https://davidcrone.github.io/xafty/reference/add_join_path.md):

``` r

query_join <- query(mtcars = "power_to_weight", engine = "type") |> 
              add_join_path(path = c("mtcars", "engine"))

head(nascent(network, query_join))
#>   power_to_weight    type
#> 1        41.98473 V-Shape
#> 2        38.26087 V-Shape
#> 3        68.62745 V-Shape
#> 4        44.22604 V-Shape
#> 5        50.87209 V-Shape
#> 6        47.61905 V-Shape
```

More formally, multiple join paths can be defined for a single query:

``` r

qry <- query(projectA = "col1", projectB = "col2", projectC = "col3")
query_join <- add_join_path(qry, path1 = c("projectA", "projectB"), path2 = c("projectA", "projectC"))
```

This configuration results in two joins being applied: `projectA` is
joined with `projectB`, and `projectA` is joined with `projectC`.
Explicit join paths provide a reliable way to control join behavior in
complex networks and help prevent unintended join resolutions as the
network evolves.

## Wrap-Up

This article introduced the core ideas behind xafty and showed how data
pipelines can be modeled as explicit, inspectable networks of
transformations. By separating data dependencies, execution logic, and
query intent, xafty makes pipelines easier to extend, reason about, and
reuse as they grow.

xafty is still in its experimental form, and feedback from you use is
essential. If you have ideas, questions, or suggestions, or if you are
experimenting with xafty in your own projects, [I would love to hear
from you](mailto:davidjvcrone@gmail.com). Your input will help shape the
next steps of the framework.
